Title: NIH Funding and Diversity, Equity, and Inclusion
Slug: nih-funding-and-diversity-equity-and-inclusion
Date: 2025-02-15 13:48:28
Category: Blog
Tags: diversity, equity, inclusion, funding

# Introduction

When Donald Trump's administration paused all federal grants many
researchers posted on social media what they used NIH Funding for. I
posted about how NIH funded many parts of my training and education as
a bioinformatician.

<https://bsky.app/profile/humbertoortiz.bsky.social/post/3lgtx36glik2a>

I wanted to collect the posts here outside of social media.

# What has NIH funding enabled?

NIH funding has supported me in every stage of my career:
undergraduate, master's student, PhD student, staff, and faculty to
work on problems from asthma to zebrafish.

When I was an undergraduate research assistant in chemistry, the NIH
supported my work in a lab that studied new compounds for their
potential to fight cancer.

In that lab I started to pivot to computer science after having the
opportunity to work on remote computing facilities (NIH Prophet and
Grateful Med).

I met my wife at a Minority Biomedical Research Support symposium with
NIH funding, a program that would be classified as Diversity, Equity
and Inclusion now (and thus be cancelled).

In grad school for master's level coursework in computer science, I
used NIH funding to work on monitoring high-risk pregnancies with
neural networks, then I moved to a part-time research assistantship
working on the Human Genome Project.

In my PhD in computer and information science and engineering, part of
the data for my dissertation came from my wife's lab, from students
and researchers looking at how we learn and remember, with NIH funding
through the SCORE program (another minority or DEI program).

NIH funding has been crucial in building and supporting the High
Performance Computing facility where I've worked since 2000, paying
salaries and providing equipment money.

The HPCf in turn uses NIH funding to support over 80 research groups
across the entire island of Puerto Rico. These researchers have
produced hundreds of papers, supported hundreds of students, produced
over a dozen patents in a wide range of areas.

(Many of these researchers have their own NIH funding and #NSFFunding
to support their work in areas ranging from drug discovery, addiction,
materials science leading to new computing devices, medical devices,
energy storage and production).

As a professor, NIH funding has helped us train 100's more students
(from Puerto Rico, and the mainland US) in computer skills including
programming and AI needed to do modern biology, mostly through
Diversity Equity and Inclusion initiatives such as IDI-BD2K, IDGeNe,
and NeuroID.
