title: CCOM 4086 - Computer Architecture 1
date: 2015-06-12
category: Teaching
tags: hacking, learning
slug: teaching/arch2015
Status: published

# Draft syllabus

## Professor

| Field        | Value                              |
|--------------|------------------------------------|
| Name         | Humberto Ortiz-Zuazaga             |
| Office       | NCL A-150                          |
| Laboratory   | NCL A-158                          |
| Telephone    | 787-764-0000 x7430                 |
| email        | <mailto:humberto.ortiz@upr.edu>    |
| Web page     | <http://ccom.uprrp.edu/~humberto/> |
| Office hours | Monday, Wednesday 8:00-9:30 AM     |
|              | Tuesday 3:30-5:00 PM               |
|              | or by appointment                  |

## Description

In this course the student is exposed to critical issues of the
architecture of modern computers. The main objective is to provide
students the knowledge necessary to understand the logic of behavior
of the main components of modern computers. Topics include the logical
design, data representation, the different types of memory and its
organization, registers, the CPU and its organization, construction
and operation of buses, I/O devices and their interfaces. Different
levels of abstraction of the computer architecture are studied: a
logical level, the architecture of micro-level, level machine
language, assembly language and operating system level. The course
also examines the main features of CISC and RISC architectures.

## Pre-requisites

1. CCOM 3033 - Introduction to problem solving with programming

## Objectives

1.  Understand the instruction set of RISC assembly and a computer are
          represented as the instructions on the computer.
1.  Describe several types of memory used in a computer (eg, cache,
          main memory, virtual), their hierarchy, and function as part
          of the system.
1.  Understanding the communication process with input and output
          devices and different mechanisms for interfacing with the
          peripheral units.
1.  Understand the process of translation required for the execution
          of an instruction-level assembly language.
1.  Understand the main components in a modern computer
1.  Understand the main features of CISC and RISC architectures
1.  Describe the sequence of micro-operations required to complete the
          execution of an instruction-level machine language
1.  Understand the logic gates that are designed with the CPU:
          Boolean, multiplexers, decoders, flip / flops, registers
1.  Understand the methods of representation of numbers and how
          arithmetic is performed on computers
1.  Evaluate the performance of a computer and understand the factors
          affecting it.
1.  Understand the process of designing a computer from a single level
          of logic gates based on conditions of operation and
          instruction set.
1.  Understand some of the techniques used to improve the performance
          of a computer at the architectural (pipelining,
          multithreading, superscalar).
1.  Understand the effects of technology and its impact in individuals
          and society

## Course schedule

   Class will meet Tuesdays and Thursdays from 1:00 to 2:20 PM in NCL
   A-143. In [UPR-RP](http://www.uprrp.edu/) attendance is compulsory.

### Tentative course calendar

| Date   | Topic          | Chapter        | Lecture      | Lab |
|--------|----------------|----------------|--------------|-----|
| Aug 11 | Intro          | 1 - 2          | [Lecture 1]({filename}arch2015/hello.md)    | Data lab
| Aug 13 | Assembly       | 3.1 - 3.5
| Aug 18 | Control        | 3.6
| Aug 20 | Procedures     | 3.7
| Aug 25 | Arrays, Structures and Unions | 3.8 - 3.9 | | Bomb lab
| Aug 27 | Pointers and GDB | 3.10.1 - 3.10.2 | 
| Sep 1  | Buffer overflow | 3.10.3
| Sep 3  | Defending against buffer overflow | 3.10.4
| Sep 8  | Y86-64 Instruction Set Architecture | 4.1.1 - 4.1.2 |  | Buffer lab
| Sep 10 | Instruction encoding | 4.1.3
| Sep 15 | Logic gates | 4.2.1
| Sep 17 | Combinational Circuits | 4.2.2
| Sep 22 | Word level circuits | 4.2.3 |  | Architecture lab A
| Sep 24 | Memory and clocking | 4.2.5
| Sep 29 | Exam 1 |
| Oct 1  | Stages of processing | 4.3.1
| Oct 6  | A sequential implementation | 4.3.2 |  | Architecture lab B
| Oct 8  | Timing | 4.3.3
| Oct 13 | Implementation | 4.3.4
| Oct 15 | Pipelining | 4.4.1 - 4.4.2
| Oct 20 | Implementing a pipeline | 4.5.1 - 4.5.3 |  | Architecture lab C
| Oct 22 | Branch prediction | 4.5.4
| Oct 27 | Hazards | 4.5.5
| Oct 29 | Stages and Control | 4.5.7 - 4.5.8
| Nov 3  | Performance | 4.5.9 |  | Project outlines
| Nov 5  | Memory | 6.1 - 6.2
| Nov 10 | Caches | 6.3 - 6.4
| Nov 12 | Performance | 6.6
| Nov 17 | Exam 2
| Nov 19 | Holiday  | Descubrimiento de PR
| Nov 24 | Holiday  | Thanksgiving
| Nov 26 | Holiday  | Thanksgiving
| Dec 1  | Project presentations
| Dec 3  | Project presentations

## Instructional resources

The course will be hosted on the <a
href="http://moodle.ccom.uprrp.edu/">CCOM Moodle</a>. Register and
stay tuned for our polls and forum postings.

## Textbook

[Computer Systems: A Programmer's Perspective, 3rd edition](http://csapp.cs.cmu.edu/)
Randal E. Bryant and David R. O'Hallaron, Carnegie Mellon University

## Software

We will use the
[Y86-64 circuit and processor simulators](http://csapp.cs.cmu.edu/3e/sim.tar)
distributed by the textbook authors.

## Evaluation

Students work will be evaluated on a 100% basis with the standard curve.

 -        Participation in course forums (online, classroom), 5% final grade
 -        Homework and quizzes, 25% final grade
 -        Two partial exams, 50% final grade
 -        Project, 20% final grade

## Reasonable accomodations for students

Students with disabilities properly registered with the Office of
Affairs for Persons with Disabilities <a
href="http://estudiantes.uprrp.edu/impedimentos/impedimentos.php">Oficina
de Asuntos para la Persona con Impedimento (O.A.P.I.)</a> should
notify the professor at the start of the semester. The professor will
make reasonable accommodations to support the student, in consultation
with OAPI.

## Academic integrity

> The University of Puerto Rico promotes the highest standards of
> academic and scientific integrity. Article 6.2 of the UPR Student
> Bylaws (Certification JS 13 2009–2010) states that “academic
> dishonesty includes but is not limited to: fraudulent actions,
> obtaining grades or academic degrees using false or fraudulent
> simulations, copying totally or partially academic work from another
> person, plagiarizing totally or partially the work of another
> person, copying totally or partially responses from another person
> to examination questions, making another person to take any test,
> oral or written examination on his/hers behalf, as well as assisting
> or facilitating any person to incur in the aforementioned
> conduct”. Fraudulent conduct refers to “behavior with the intent to
> defraud, including but not limited to, malicious alteration or
> falsification of grades, records, identification cards or other
> official documents of the UPR or any other institution.” Any of
> these actions shall be subject to disciplinary sanctions in
> accordance with the disciplinary procedure, as stated in the
> existing UPR Student Bylaws.

DISCLAIMER: The above statement is an English translation, prepared at
the Deanship of Academic Affairs of the Medical Sciences Campus, of
certain parts of Article 6.2 of the UPR Student Bylaws “Reglamento
General de Estudiantes de la Universidad de Puerto Rico”,
(Certificación JS 13 2009-2010). It is in no way intended to be a
legal substitute for the original document, written in Spanish.
