title: CCOM 4086 - Computer Architecture 1
date: 2022-01-13
category: Teaching
tags: hacking, learning
slug: teaching/arch2022
Status: published

# Draft syllabus

## Professor

| Field        | Value                              |
|--------------|------------------------------------|
| Name         | Humberto Ortiz-Zuazaga             |
| Office       | NCL A-150                          |
| Laboratory   | NCL A-158                          |
| Telephone    | 787-764-0000 x7430                 |
| email        | <mailto:humberto.ortiz@upr.edu>    |
| Web page     | <http://ccom.uprrp.edu/~humberto/> |
| Office hours |                                    |
|              | by appointment                     |

## Description

In this course the student is exposed to critical issues of the
architecture of modern computers. The main objective is to provide
students the knowledge necessary to understand the logic of behavior
of the main components of modern computers. Topics include the logical
design, data representation, the different types of memory and its
organization, registers, the CPU and its organization, construction
and operation of buses, I/O devices and their interfaces. Different
levels of abstraction of the computer architecture are studied: a
logical level, the architecture of micro-level, level machine
language, assembly language and operating system level. The course
also examines the main features of CISC and RISC architectures.

## Pre-requisites

1. CCOM 3033 - Introduction to problem solving with programming

## Objectives

1.  Understand the instruction set of RISC assembly and a computer are
          represented as the instructions on the computer.
1.  Describe several types of memory used in a computer (eg, cache,
          main memory, virtual), their hierarchy, and function as part
          of the system.
1.  Understanding the communication process with input and output
          devices and different mechanisms for interfacing with the
          peripheral units.
1.  Understand the process of translation required for the execution
          of an instruction-level assembly language.
1.  Understand the main components in a modern computer
1.  Understand the main features of CISC and RISC architectures
1.  Describe the sequence of micro-operations required to complete the
          execution of an instruction-level machine language
1.  Understand the logic gates that are designed with the CPU:
          Boolean, multiplexers, decoders, flip / flops, registers
1.  Understand the methods of representation of numbers and how
          arithmetic is performed on computers
1.  Evaluate the performance of a computer and understand the factors
          affecting it.
1.  Understand the process of designing a computer from a single level
          of logic gates based on conditions of operation and
          instruction set.
1.  Understand some of the techniques used to improve the performance
          of a computer at the architectural (pipelining,
          multithreading, superscalar).
1.  Understand the effects of technology and its impact in individuals
          and society

## Course schedule

   Class will meet Mondays and Wednesdays from 1:00 to 2:20 PM in CNL-A143. In
   [UPR-RP](http://www.uprrp.edu/) attendance is compulsory. **NOTE: Due to
   COVID-19, clases are online until 2022-02-08.**

The course will be taught in face to face mode, however given the emergency
circumstances related to COVID-19, or other emergency situation that might
arise, the course will be switched to distance mode assisted by technology.

### Tentative course calendar

| Date | Topic                               | Chapter         | Lecture                                  | Lab                                      |
|------|-------------------------------------|-----------------|------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------|
| Jan  | Intro                               | 1 - 2           | [Lecture 1]({filename}arch2015/hello.md) | Data lab [instructions]({attach}arch2022/datalab.pdf) [tarfile]({attach}arch2022/datalab-handout.tar) |
|      | Assembly                            | 3.1 - 3.5       |                                          |                                          |
|      | Control                             | 3.6             |                                          |                                          |
|      | Procedures                          | 3.7             |                                          |                                          |
|      | Arrays, Structures and Unions       | 3.8 - 3.9       |                                          | Bomb lab                                 |
|      | Pointers and GDB                    | 3.10.1 - 3.10.2 |                                          |                                          |
| Feb  | Buffer overflow                     | 3.10.3          |                                          |                                          |
|      | Defending against buffer overflow   | 3.10.4          |                                          |                                          |
|      | Y86-64 Instruction Set Architecture | 4.1.1 - 4.1.2   |                                          | Buffer lab                               |
|      | Instruction encoding                | 4.1.3           |                                          |                                          |
|      | Logic gates                         | 4.2.1           |                                          |                                          |
|      | Combinational Circuits              | 4.2.2           |                                          |                                          |
|      | Word level circuits                 | 4.2.3           |                                          | Architecture lab A                       |
|      | Memory and clocking                 | 4.2.5           |                                          |                                          |
|      | Exam 1                              |                 |                                          |                                          |
| Mar  | Stages of processing                | 4.3.1           |                                          |                                          |
|      | A sequential implementation         | 4.3.2           |                                          | Architecture lab B                       |
|      | Timing                              | 4.3.3           |                                          |                                          |
|      | Implementation                      | 4.3.4           |                                          |                                          |
|      | Pipelining                          | 4.4.1 - 4.4.2   |                                          |                                          |
| Apr  | Implementing a pipeline             | 4.5.1 - 4.5.3   |                                          | Architecture lab C                       |
|      | Branch prediction                   | 4.5.4           |                                          |                                          |
|      | Hazards                             | 4.5.5           |                                          |                                          |
|      | Stages and Control                  | 4.5.7 - 4.5.8   |                                          |                                          |
|      | Performance                         | 4.5.9           |                                          |                                          |
| May  | Memory                              | 6.1 - 6.2       |                                          |                                          |
|      | Caches                              | 6.3 - 6.4       |                                          |                                          |
|      | Performance                         | 6.6             |                                          |                                          |
|      | Exam 2                              |                 |                                          |                                          |

### Alternative Teaching Methods

Certification No. 112 (2014-2015) of the Governing Board defines a
classroom course as a course in which 75% or more of the hours of
instruction require the physical presence of the students and the
teacher in the classroom.  This means that 25% of a classroom course
could be offered without requiring the physical presence of the
students and the teacher in the classroom.  If necessary, this course
will be able to complete up to 25% of the contact hours (11.25 hours)
on a non-face-to-face basis by alternative methods such as:
videoconferences, instructional modules, discussion forums and
others. If so, the calendar/agenda will be modified to include the
topics that will be covered by alternative methods.

## Instructional resources

The course will be hosted on the <a
href="https://online.uprrp.edu/">UPRRP Moodle</a>. Register and
stay tuned for our polls and forum postings.

## Textbook

[Computer Systems: A Programmer's Perspective, 3rd edition](http://csapp.cs.cmu.edu/)
Randal E. Bryant and David R. O'Hallaron, Carnegie Mellon University

## Software

We will use the
[Y86-64 circuit and processor simulators](http://csapp.cs.cmu.edu/3e/sim.tar)
distributed by the textbook authors.

## Evaluation

Students work will be evaluated on a 100% basis with the standard curve.

 -        Participation in course forums (online, classroom), 5% final grade
 -        Homework and quizzes, 45% final grade
 -        Two partial exams, 50% final grade

## REGULATION ON DISCRIMINATION BY SEX AND GENDER IN THE FORM OF SEXUAL VIOLENCE

The University of Puerto Rico prohibits discrimination based on sex, sexual
orientation, and gender identity in any of its forms, including that of sexual
harassment. According to the Institutional Policy Against Sexual Harassment at
the University of Puerto Rico, Certification Num. 130, 2014-2015 from the Board
of Governors, any student subjected to acts constituting sexual harassment, must
tum to the Office of the Student Ombudsperson, the Office of the Dean of
Students, and/or the Coordinator of the Office of Compliance with Title IX for
an orientation and/or a formal complaint.

## REASONABLE ACCOMMODATION

The University of Puerto Rico complies with all state and federal laws and
regulations related to discrimination, including “The American Disabilities Act”
(ADA law) and Law #51 from the Puerto Rico Commonwealth (Estado Libre Asociado
de Puerto Rico). Every student has the right to request and receive reasonable
accommodation and Vocational Rehabilitation Services (VRS). Those students with
special needs that require some type of particular assistance or accommodation
shall explicitly communicate it directly to the professor. Students who are
receiving VRS services shall communicate it to the professor at the beginning of
the semester so that appropriate planning and the necessary equipment may be
requested according to the Disabilities Persons Affairs Office (Oficina de
Servicios a Estudiantes con Impedimentos –OSEI) from the Students’ Deanship
office. Any other student requiring assistance or special accommodation shall
also communicate directly with the professor. Reasonable accommodations requests
or services DO NOT exempt the student from complying and fulfilling academic and
course related requirements and responsibilities.

## ACADEMIC INTEGRITY

The University of Puerto Rico promotes the highest standards of academic and
scientific integrity. Article 6.2 of the UPR Students General Bylaws (Board of
Trustees Certification 13, 2009-2010) states that academic dishonesty includes,
but is not limited to: fraudulent actions; obtaining grades or academic degrees
by false or fraudulent simulations; copying the whole or part of the academic
work of another person; plagiarizing totally or partially the work of another
person; copying all or part of another person answers to the questions of an
oral or written exam by taking or getting someone else to take the exam on
his/her behalf; as well as enabling and facilitating another person to perform
the aforementioned behavior. Any of these behaviors will be subject to
disciplinary action in accordance with the disciplinary procedure laid down in
the UPR Students General Bylaws.

To ensure user data integrity and security, hybrid and distance education
courses are offered through the institutional learning management system, which
employs secure connection and authentication protocols. The system authenticates
the users’ identity with the username and password of their institutional
accounts. Users are responsible for keeping their password secure and not
sharing with others.
