title: CCOM 3030 002 - Introduction to Computer Science - Fall 2025
date: 2025-07-10
category: Teaching
tags: hacking, learning
slug: teaching/ccom3030-f2025
Status: published

## Institution

<h3>
University of Puerto Rico <br/>
Rio Piedras Campus<br/>
College of Natural Sciences<br/>
Department of Computer Science
</h3>

## Professor

| Field        | Value                              |
|--------------|------------------------------------|
| Name         | Humberto Ortiz-Zuazaga             |
| Office       | NCL A-159                          |
| Laboratory   | NCL A-158                          |
| Telephone    | 787-764-0000 x88363                |
| email        | <mailto:humberto.ortiz@upr.edu>    |
| Web page     | <http://ccom.uprrp.edu/~humberto/> |
| Office hours | M-F 2:00-3:00 PM     |
|              | or by appointment                  |

## Description

This course provides a panoramic view of Computer Science through
various areas of specialization (e.g. databases, operating systems,
networks, artificial intelligence, bioinformatics). It presents
foundations from which one can appreciate the relevance and the
interrelation among different subjects of Computer Science. The course
also provides an introduction to skills related to problem solving and
general concepts of concurrent programming. You must get a
grade of A or B in CCOM 3030 to take the course CCOM 3033.

## Content

 - History of computers and their impact in society
 - Numeric systems
 - Boolean algebra and logic circuits
 - Data representation
 - Introduction to computer systems
 - Algorithms and programming
 - Student reports on a topic of Computer Science

## Objectives

 1. Formulate problems and present solutions to them
 1. Understand how computers can be used to solve problems and tasks
 1. Understand how different areas of Computer Science relate to each other to create solutions to problems
 1. Use control structures (statements, selection, loops) in a programming language to implement algorithms
 1. Understand the fundamentals of computer science
 1. Write algorithms using different techniques, as flowcharts, pseudocodes and a high level language
 1. Use modular programming principles to implement in a programming language (i.e. define and use functions)
 1. Explore the implications of Moore's law
 1. Identify critical regions in small programs
 1. Apreciate the impact of computer science on society
 1. Recognize the imporance of Boolean algebra on the development of hardware and software

## Course Schedule

LW 10:00 AM - 11:20 AM

## Outline of topics

| Date | Topic                      | Reading                                                                                                               | Assignment                                                                           |
|------|----------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Aug  | Introduction               |                                                                                                                       |                                                                                      |
|      | Pyret                      | [Why pyret?](https://dcic-world.org/2025-02-09/booklet_intro.html#%28part._.Our_.Programming_.Language_.Choice%29)    |                                                                                      |
|      | Values, Expresisons, Types | [Getting started](https://dcic-world.org/2025-02-09/getting-started.html)                                             |                                                                                      |
|      | Identifiers                | [Naming Values](https://dcic-world.org/2025-02-09/booklet_intro.html#%28part._.Our_.Programming_.Language_.Choice%29) |                                                                                      |
| Sep  | Functions                  | [Functions](https://dcic-world.org/2025-02-09/From_Repeated_Expressions_to_Functions.html)                            | [Practica funciones]({filename}/pages/teaching/ccom3030-f2025/practica-funciones.md) |
|      | Conditionals               |                                                                                                                       |                                                                                      |
|      | Tabular data               |                                                                                                                       |                                                                                      |
| Oct  | Python                     |                                                                                                                       |                                                                                      |
| Nov  | UXN                        |                                                                                                                       |                                                                                      |

## Instructional resources

Pyret
<https://code.pyret.org/>

Python
<https://www.python.org/>

Learn UXN
<https://metasyn.srht.site/learn-uxn/>

## Textbook

A Data-Centric Introduction to Computing.
Kathi Fisler,
Shriram Krishnamurthi,
Benjamin S. Lerner,
Joe Gibbs Politz.
<https://dcic-world.org/>

Introducción a programación uxn
Compudanzas
<https://compudanzas.itch.io/introduccion-a-programacion-uxn>

## Software

All class projects can be completed with open source software: pyret,
python, and uxn.

## Evaluation

Students work will be evaluated on a 100% basis with the standard curve.

 - Participation in class, 25% final grade
 - Assignments, 25% final grade
 - Technical report, 25% final grade
 - Exams, 25% final grade

### Alternative Teaching Methods

Certification No. 112 (2014-2015) of the Governing Board defines a
classroom course as a course in which 75% or more of the hours of
instruction require the physical presence of the students and the
teacher in the classroom.  This means that 25% of a classroom course
could be offered without requiring the physical presence of the
students and the teacher in the classroom.  If necessary, this course
will be able to complete up to 25% of the contact hours (11.25 hours)
on a non-face-to-face basis by alternative methods such as:
videoconferences, instructional modules, discussion forums and
others. If so, the calendar/agenda will be modified to include the
topics that will be covered by alternative methods.

## REGULATION ON DISCRIMINATION BY SEX AND GENDER IN THE FORM OF SEXUAL VIOLENCE

The University of Puerto Rico prohibits discrimination based on sex, sexual
orientation, and gender identity in any of its forms, including that of sexual
harassment. According to the Institutional Policy Against Sexual Harassment at
the University of Puerto Rico, Certification Num. 107, 2021-2022 from the Board
of Governors, any student subjected to acts constituting sexual harassment, must
tum to the Office of the Student Ombudsperson, the Office of the Dean of
Students, and/or the Coordinator of the Office of Compliance with Title IX for
an orientation and/or a formal complaint.

## Reasonable accomodations for students

Students with disabilities properly registered with the Office of
Affairs for Persons with Disabilities
<a href="http://estudiantes.uprrp.edu/impedimentos/impedimentos.php">Oficina de Asuntos para la Persona con Impedimento (O.A.P.I.)</a> should notify the professor at the
start of the semester. The professor will make reasonable
accommodations to support the student, in consultation with OAPI.

## Academic integrity

> The University of Puerto Rico promotes the highest standards of
> academic and scientific integrity. Article 6.2 of the UPR Student
> Bylaws (Certification JS 13 2009–2010) states that “academic
> dishonesty includes but is not limited to: fraudulent actions,
> obtaining grades or academic degrees using false or fraudulent
> simulations, copying totally or partially academic work from another
> person, plagiarizing totally or partially the work of another
> person, copying totally or partially responses from another person
> to examination questions, making another person to take any test,
> oral or written examination on his/hers behalf, as well as assisting
> or facilitating any person to incur in the aforementioned
> conduct”. Fraudulent conduct refers to “behavior with the intent to
> defraud, including but not limited to, malicious alteration or
> falsification of grades, records, identification cards or other
> official documents of the UPR or any other institution.” Any of
> these actions shall be subject to disciplinary sanctions in
> accordance with the disciplinary procedure, as stated in the
> existing UPR Student Bylaws.

DISCLAIMER: The above statement is an English translation, prepared at
the Deanship of Academic Affairs of the Medical Sciences Campus, of
certain parts of Article 6.2 of the UPR Student Bylaws “Reglamento
General de Estudiantes de la Universidad de Puerto Rico”,
(Certificación JS 13 2009-2010). It is in no way intended to be a
legal substitute for the original document, written in Spanish.

## References

1. G. Anderson, D. Ferro & R. Hilton. Connecting with Computer Science, Thomson, 2010.
1. J. G. Brooksshear. Computer Science: An Overview (12 Edition), Addison Wesley, 2014.
1. N. Dale & J. Lewis. Computer Science Illuminated, Jones and Bartlett, 2012.
1. Behrouz Forouzan, Firouz Mosharraf, Foundations of Computer Science, 2013.
1. M. Guzdial, Introduction to Computing and Programming in Python (3rd Edition), Prentice Hall, 2012.
1. Vahid. Digital Design with RTL Design, VHDL, and Verilog. Wiley. 2010
1. G. M. Schneider & J. L. Gersting. Invitation to Computer Science, Thomson, 2012.
1. L. Torres, Asistencia tecnológica: una posibilidad real, Isla Negra, 2002
1. Revistas especializadas como las publicadas por la ACM y la IEEE.
1. Denning, Peter J. Is computer science science?. Communications of the ACM 48.4 (2005): 27­31.
1. Colección de Referencias de Ciencia de Cómputos. <http://liinwww.ira.uka.de/bibliography/>
