title: CCOM 4997 - Computer Science Project - Spring 2018
date: 2018-03-08
category: Teaching
tags: hacking, learning
slug: teaching/csp-S2018

## Institution

<h3>
University of Puerto Rico <br/>
Rio Piedras Campus<br/>
College of Natural Sciences<br/>
Department of Computer Science
</h3>

## Professor

| Field        | Value                              |
|--------------|------------------------------------|
| Name         | Humberto Ortiz-Zuazaga             |
| Office       | NCL A-159                          |
| Laboratory   | NCL A-158                          |
| Telephone    | 787-764-0000 x88363                |
| email        | <mailto:humberto.ortiz@upr.edu>    |
| Web page     | <http://ccom.uprrp.edu/~humberto/> |
| Office hours | by appointment                  |

## Description

This course will give the students of the Computer Science Program the
opportunity to complete a project related to computer science. Each
student will work independently in a project under the supervision of
the professor. There will be weekly meetings to discuss the progress
made and approaches to complete the project. At the end of the
semester the student will turn in the software of the project with a
description and usage manual.

## Pre-requisite

None

## Content

By agreement

## Objectives

By agreement

## Course Schedule

By agreement

## Instructional resources


## Textbook


## Software


## Evaluation

Students work will be evaluated on a 100% basis with the standard curve.

 -        Participation in lab meetings, 25% final grade
 -        Technical report, 50% final grade
 -        User manual, 25% final grade

## Reasonable accomodations for students

Students with disabilities properly registered with the Office of
Affairs for Persons with Disabilities
<a href="http://estudiantes.uprrp.edu/impedimentos/impedimentos.php">Oficina de Asuntos para la Persona con Impedimento (O.A.P.I.)</a> should notify the professor at the
start of the semester. The professor will make reasonable
accommodations to support the student, in consultation with OAPI.

## Academic integrity

> The University of Puerto Rico promotes the highest standards of
> academic and scientific integrity. Article 6.2 of the UPR Student
> Bylaws (Certification JS 13 2009–2010) states that “academic
> dishonesty includes but is not limited to: fraudulent actions,
> obtaining grades or academic degrees using false or fraudulent
> simulations, copying totally or partially academic work from another
> person, plagiarizing totally or partially the work of another
> person, copying totally or partially responses from another person
> to examination questions, making another person to take any test,
> oral or written examination on his/hers behalf, as well as assisting
> or facilitating any person to incur in the aforementioned
> conduct”. Fraudulent conduct refers to “behavior with the intent to
> defraud, including but not limited to, malicious alteration or
> falsification of grades, records, identification cards or other
> official documents of the UPR or any other institution.” Any of
> these actions shall be subject to disciplinary sanctions in
> accordance with the disciplinary procedure, as stated in the
> existing UPR Student Bylaws.

DISCLAIMER: The above statement is an English translation, prepared at
the Deanship of Academic Affairs of the Medical Sciences Campus, of
certain parts of Article 6.2 of the UPR Student Bylaws “Reglamento
General de Estudiantes de la Universidad de Puerto Rico”,
(Certificación JS 13 2009-2010). It is in no way intended to be a
legal substitute for the original document, written in Spanish.

