title: PREH 4900 - Years of Potential Life Lost in Puerto Rico Due to COVID-19 - Fall 2021
date: 2021-02-03
category: Teaching
tags: learning
slug: teaching/preh-4900-F2021

## Institution

<h3>
University of Puerto Rico <br/>
Rio Piedras Campus<br/>
Deanship of Academic Affairs
Honors Study Program<br/>
</h3>

## Course titles

Years of Potential Life Lost in Puerto Rico due to COVID-19<br/>
YPLL in PR due to COVID-19  
Mortalidad en PR por COVID  

## Course code

PREH 4900

## Credits

3 credit hours

## Pre-requisites

No pre-requisites

## Professor

| Field        | Value                              |
|--------------|------------------------------------|
| Name         | Humberto Ortiz-Zuazaga, PhD        |
| Office       | NCL A-159                          |
| Laboratory   | NCL A-158                          |
| Telephone    | 787-764-0000 x88363                |
| email        | <mailto:humberto.ortiz@upr.edu>    |
| Web page     | <http://ccom.uprrp.edu/~humberto/> |
| Office hours | Monday and Tuesday 1:00 - 3:00 PM  |
|              | or by appointment                  |

## Description

This course will give participants an introduction to data science in public
health. We will use the publically available data on mortality in Puerto Rico
and open source tools for data science to investigate the impacts of the
COVID-19 pandemic on public health in Puerto Rico. Years of Potential Life Lost,
or YPLL, is a public health measure that seeks to quantify the effects of a
process on society.

Through case studies and project based learning, the student will learn about
challenges and opportunities in the use of public mortality data, data science
concepts, and how to present research findings on the societal impacts of
COVID-19 in a way to inform public discourse.

The student will work independently on their YPLL research proposal under the
supervision of the researcher. There will be online weekly meetings to discuss
the progress made and approaches to advance the completion of the proposal. At
the end of the semester the student will submit and defend a research proposal
to the Honors Study Program.

## Objectives

By the end of the semester the student is expected to achieve the following objectives:

1. Be able to manage research data sets
1. Apply data science principles to clean, normalize and analize data sets
1. Communicate results of experiments and analysis in written and oral forms
1. Understand reproducibility issues in science, and the tools to manage
   reproducibility
1. Understand ethical issues in the collection, dissemination and analysis of
   public health data, and health disparities
1. Understand how public health measures can help understand complex phenomena
1. Prepare and defend a research proposal on Years of Potential Life Lost

## Course Schedule

One contact hour per week, by agreement. Due to the COVID-19 pandemic, meetings
will likely be virtual.

August
: Introduction to data science, data provenance, repositories, the R and
  bioconductor programming environments. Reproducibility.

September
: Literature review of Years of Potential Life Lost and public health.
  Identification of data sets for analysis and comparison with Puerto Rico.

October
: Analysis of mortality data from Puerto Rico and comparable jurisdictions.
  Comparison of YPLL across years, across causes of death, and across
  jurisdictions.
  
November
: Preparation and defense of research proposal.
  
December
: Presentation of research results, dissemination of results via research
  repositories.

## Alternative Teaching Methods

Certification No. 112 (2014-2015) of the Governing Board defines a classroom
course as a course in which 75% or more of the hours of instruction require the
physical presence of the students and the teacher in the classroom. This means
that 25% of a classroom course could be offered without requiring the physical
presence of the students and the teacher in the classroom. If necessary, this
course will be able to complete up to 25% of the contact hours (11.25 hours) on
a non-face-to-face basis by alternative methods such as: videoconferences,
instructional modules, discussion forums and others. If so, the calendar/agenda
will be modified to include the topics that will be covered by alternative
methods.

## Instructional resources

The student will need a computer with internet access to participate in virtual
lab meetings and prepare analyses and reports.

## Textbook

Irizarry, Rafael A. Introduction to data science: Data analysis and prediction
algorithms with R. CRC Press, 2019. ISBN 9780367357986
<https://rafalab.github.io/dsbook/>

## Software

We will use the R software environment and the bioconductor project to analize
and present results.

## Instructional technique

The course will primarilly be structured as a Course-based Undergraduate
Research experience. At the start of the semester, several brief meetings will
present materials and techniques. The student will then work independently on
research problems where they will apply the techniques and prepare a written
report. At the end of the semester the student will present their research
proposal to the Honors Program and defend it.

## Evaluation

Students work will be evaluated on a 100% basis with the standard curve. Work
will be graded with letter grades A, B, C, D, or F.

 -        Participation in lab meetings, 25% final grade
 -        Written proposal and defense, 50% final grade
 -        Lab reports, 25% final grade

## REGULATION ON DISCRIMINATION BY SEX AND GENDER IN THE FORM OF SEXUAL VIOLENCE

The University of Puerto Rico prohibits discrimination based on sex, sexual
orientation, and gender identity in any of its forms, including that of sexual
harassment. According to the Institutional Policy Against Sexual Harassment at
the University of Puerto Rico, Certification Num. 130, 2014-2015 from the Board
of Governors, any student subjected to acts constituting sexual harassment, must
tum to the Office of the Student Ombudsperson, the Office of the Dean of
Students, and/or the Coordinator of the Office of Compliance with Title IX for
an orientation and/or a formal complaint.

## REASONABLE ACCOMMODATION

The University of Puerto Rico complies with all state and federal laws and
regulations related to discrimination, including “The American Disabilities Act”
(ADA law) and Law #51 from the Puerto Rico Commonwealth (Estado Libre Asociado
de Puerto Rico). Every student has the right to request and receive reasonable
accommodation and Vocational Rehabilitation Services (VRS). Those students with
special needs that require some type of particular assistance or accommodation
shall explicitly communicate it directly to the professor. Students who are
receiving VRS services shall communicate it to the professor at the beginning of
the semester so that appropriate planning and the necessary equipment may be
requested according to the Disabilities Persons Affairs Office (Oficina de
Servicios a Estudiantes con Impedimentos –OSEI) from the Students’ Deanship
office. Any other student requiring assistance or special accommodation shall
also communicate directly with the professor. Reasonable accommodations requests
or services DO NOT exempt the student from complying and fulfilling academic and
course related requirements and responsibilities.

## ACADEMIC INTEGRITY

The University of Puerto Rico promotes the highest standards of academic and
scientific integrity. Article 6.2 of the UPR Students General Bylaws (Board of
Trustees Certification 13, 2009-2010) states that academic dishonesty includes,
but is not limited to: fraudulent actions; obtaining grades or academic degrees
by false or fraudulent simulations; copying the whole or part of the academic
work of another person; plagiarizing totally or partially the work of another
person; copying all or part of another person answers to the questions of an
oral or written exam by taking or getting someone else to take the exam on
his/her behalf; as well as enabling and facilitating another person to perform
the aforementioned behavior. Any of these behaviors will be subject to
disciplinary action in accordance with the disciplinary procedure laid down in
the UPR Students General Bylaws.

To ensure user data integrity and security, hybrid and distance education
courses are offered through the institutional learning management system, which
employs secure connection and authentication protocols. The system authenticates
the users’ identity with the username and password of their institutional
accounts. Users are responsible for keeping their password secure and not
sharing with others.

## References

1. Humberto Ortiz-Zuazaga, Roberto Arce-Corretjer, Juan M. Solá-Sloan, José G.
   Conde. SalHUD – A Graphical Interface to Public Health Data in Puerto Rico.
   *International Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health.* Vol
   *13*, No 1, 18, *2015*. doi:10.3390/ijerph13010018

1. Stephen J. Elledge. 2.5 Million Person-Years of Life Have Been Lost Due to
   COVID-19 in the United States medRxiv 2020.10.18.20214783; doi:
   https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.18.20214783
  
1. Ramirez de Arellano, A.B. The death divide: Differentials in premature
   mortality by gender in Puerto Rico. Bol. Asoc. Med. P. R. 1992, 84, 11–14.

1. Huber, W., Carey, V., Gentleman, R. et al. Orchestrating high-throughput
   genomic analysis with Bioconductor. Nat Methods 12, 115–121 (2015).
   https://doi.org/10.1038/nmeth.3252

1. R Core Team (2017). R: A language and environment for statistical computing.
   R Foundation for Statistical Computing, Vienna, Austria. URL
   https://www.R-project.org/.

1. Irizarry, Rafael A. Introduction to data science: Data analysis and
   prediction algorithms with R. CRC Press, 2019.
